- [Instructor] The Streams API
and Lambdas added to Java 8 gave us
a concise functional style for writing code.
Let me show you through an example.
In our application, we have a collection of rooms
that I iterate through and check if the room
is pet friendly.
If it is, I write its name out to the console.
This style of code is known as the imperative style.
When we use an imperative style,
we have to specify exactly how we want the code to behave.
So I need to write the code that does the iteration,
performs the conditional check
and writes the information to the console.
When we use a functional style with streams,
it's a little bit different.
It's more like we tell the code what we want to achieve.
Let me show you.
So first, think of a stream as a pipeline
that our elements flow through
but it never stores them like a collection.
The elements are always moving forward
through the stream.
So first, we need a source of elements
that can flow through the stream.
We can find them in our collection.
So on our collection, I'm going to invoke the stream method
in order to start the pipeline that the elements
in our collection will flow through.
Now, on that pipeline,
we can add operations,
and our first one is going
to be an intermediate operation named filter.
It allows us to perform a test
on the elements flowing through the stream
that will determine if they continue on
for further processing.
Now, to perform that test,
we use an object known as a predicate.
A predicate is a functional interface.
So I'm actually going to create an instance
of a predicate using an anonymous class.
This is kind of a long way
but it's going to show you how a collection works.
So let's go ahead and import the predicate type.
Just hover over the type
and then select java.util.function.predicate,
and then in order to add the method to the body
of the predicate,
just hover over the type again,
and click on add unimplemented methods.
And here we can see the signature
of the functional interface.
You'll notice that it accepts a parameter of type room.
That makes sense.
It's the type of element that's flowing through the stream
because it's the type of element found in our collection.
Now, in the body of this method,
what we do is we perform some sort of test on the room.
And in this case,
we just want to check if it's pet friendly.
And it's pretty easy because PetFriendly is a Boolean
and we're just going to return the result of the method.
That result will determine
whether or not the element continues
for further processing in the pipeline
to the next operation.
So let's go ahead and add that operation.
We could add another intermediate operation
but instead, I'm going to use
a terminal operation named forEach.
So a terminal operation is used to end the pipeline.
It's either going to return a result
or modify the elements that are streamed into it.
Now, when we use the forEach method,
we need to supply a consumer,
which is another functional interface.
So I'm going to use an anonymous class
so that we can see this as well.
All right, so let's go ahead
and we'll import the Consumer type,
and then we're going to add its functional interface method.
And you can see that it just accepts a room
as a parameter.
I'll go ahead and change that parameter name.
And then inside of its body,
we're going to print out the name of the room
to the console.
Now, I'm going to do one more thing here.
I'm going to add a little bit of debugging.
So I'll use System.out.format
and here I can provide a pattern.
So we can say that we're testing,
and then we'll provide a string
and then we'll say that we got a result,
and we'll provide a Boolean,
and then I'll just put a new line.
And now we can pass in the arguments to that pattern.
The first one will be the name of the room,
and the second one will be the results
of our isPetFriendly call.
All right, so what we're doing here
is just printing the name of the room,
and whether or not it's pet friendly.
And I added this so that you can see how the stream works.
Watch what happens when I execute this code.
You can see the elements flowing
through the different operations in the pipeline.
So first, the Cambridge room went through the pipeline.
And because our predicate returned false,
the filter method blocked it from further processing.
Now, you can see the next room, Oxford,
was pet friendly.
So the filter allowed it to continue on
for further processing
and then our consumer printed out the name
of the room to the console.
And you can see what happened
with the other two rooms as well.
One was allowed to process
and the other was blocked.
So that's how a stream works
but I probably haven't sold you on the conciseness
of the functional programming style.
And that's because I used those anonymous classes.
So that's where we're going to pick up in our next lesson
where we take a look at the lambda expression.